# Predicting County-Level Mortality Rates: The Value of Social Media in the Absence of Complete Data about Socio-Structural Determinants of Health

Topics of discussion on social media have been shown to predict regional death rates and other clinical outcomes even after including demographic and socioeconomic controls (e.g., age and education). Despite these important demonstrations, the predictive value of social media language should be evaluated after having a comprehensive set of socio-structural determinants of county health outcomes. Thus, in this paper, we analyzed the contribution of social media language after including county-level socioeconomic factors (e.g., % public assistance program recipients), ethnicity (i.e., % Hispanic residents), health behaviors (e.g., drug use), health policies (e.g., medical resources per capita), and environmental variables (e.g., urbanicity). We acquired 4.4 billion tweets from 2009 to 2018 and used open-vocabulary machine learning techniques to extract linguistic features (i.e., words, phrases, and topics) to predict mortality rates in US counties. According to the analyses of age-adjusted all-cause mortality rates as well as the ten leading causes of death in the US, linguistic features improved the prediction performance of most models based on ethnicity, health policies, and environmental factors when each of these three sets of predictors were included alone. We concluded that linguistic features are critical predictors of mortality rates when data about socio-structural factors are limited but become redundant in the presence of all relevant socio-structural predictors.
Implications for the prediction of these and other health outcomes are discussed.


[**Note**]: This paper is under review for publication. The feature information and the results will be added to repo after publication. 